Date: November 15th, 2018

Title

An ocean-wide population assignment to estimate harvest impacts on thick-billed and common murres (Uria lomvia and U. aalge)


Abstract

...


Introduction


 Decades of research in conservation have sought to answer the question: "where do migratory organisms go (Webster & Marra, 2005)?" Annual migration is a widespread phenomenon across vertebrate taxa that poses challenges to conservation. Disentangling the demographic effects of seasonal interactions and migratory connectivity is necessary to determine a migratory population's conservation needs. Seasonal interactions refer to a population's demographic events or environmental conditions that carry over from one migratory stage and impact the individuals or population at another migratory stage. For example, in North American monarch butterflies (Danaus plexippus), a storm at one overwintering area resulted in the mortality of up to 300 million individuals, and this severe population decline was evident the following summer. Seasonal interactions can be confounded by migratory connectivity which refers to the degree to which specific breeding and wintering populations are connected (Webster et al., 2002). If all of the individuals in a breeding population migrate to a single wintering area, thereby maintaining an exclusive year-round population, this population exhibits strong migratory connectivity. Conversely, weak migratory connectivity occurs if all of the individuals of several breeding populations migrate in equal proportion to several wintering areas. Weaker connectivity should 

weaker connectivity should be more challenging to decipher than stronger connectivity

In monarchs, the overwintering population corresponded to a broad but exclusive summer population, therefore, other summer populations of monarch were unaffected by the mass mortality.



transition statement - populations that exhibit weak migratory connectivity are, in theory, more difficult to conserve




Seabirds

Topic sentence - seabird life history traits suggest that seabird migratory connectivity is weak and variable, therefore, studies should focus on discovering populations' migratory patterns and the factors that determine those patterns.

Why conserve seabirds?
-sensitive to anthropogenic activity
-high trophic predators
-

Seabirds are sensitive to anthropogenic stressors and sources of mortality
 climate change-induced variance in prey distributions

some are more severe during winter while birds survive on open water. 
 gillnet bycatch
 oil pollution and development
 harvest

health of seabird populations depends on adult survival




Thick-billed and common murres (Uria lomvia and U. aalge, respectively) are integral to the cultures of northern indigenous peoples and settled, coastal communities in Newfoundland and Labrador, and because local murre populations have recently experienced severe declines and local extirpations in certain areas.


Thick-billed and common murre (Uria lomvia and U. aalge, respectively) local populations have recently experienced extirpations and are currently experiencing severe declines in certain areas. 


For thousands of years, arctic indigenous peoples throughout the northern hemisphere have harvested murres for subsistence.



indigenous hunt
 numbers - important
 how it is done - important?
 management - important
newfoundland hunt
 numbers - important
 how it is done - important?
 management - important


what is important
 where the declines are
 what could be causing the declines




Declines in east Atlantic murre breeding populations (mainland Norway, Svalbard, Iceland) have been attributed to shifts in ocean regime due to climatic ocillations, but the impact of harvest on these populations is unknown.


Fluctuations in murre populations may destabilize circumpolar marine trophic networks because murres comprise a significant portion of the biomass of the northern hemisphere pelagic fauna. Murre breeding colonies are found throughout the northern hemisphere, and their current global population is estimated to be (HOW MANY MILLION BIRDS?????). Throughout the year, murres feed on small pelagic and benthic prey (SENTENCE ABOUT BIOMASS OF NORTHERN OCEANS). (SENTENCE ABOUT ESTIMATED IMPACT)

Descamps et al 2013
- Svalbard experienced rapid declines in 2000s - likely associated with subpolar gyre - a change in oceanic regime

Irons et al 2008
- "murre diets differ throughout their range in accordance to distinct water temperatures"
- North Atlantic, Arctic cod and sculpin important for TBMUs in high arctic areas
- capelin and gadoid species such as Atlantic cod dominate diet in low arctic
- Atlantic COMUs depend largely on capelin in low arctic, while those breeding in boreal zone prey much on herring and sandlance
- fish pops sensitive to shifts in ocean regime and long-term climate changes
- results of this study suggest that relatively large climate shifts, irrespective of direction, may have had negative consequences for marine food webs and hence for murre populations
- 

subsistence hunt

Northern indigenous communities rely on murres for nutrition year-round, and coastal, settled communities in Newfoundland and Labrador harvest and eat murres as a cultural tradition.

local declines and extirpations a result of increased population size, mechanized boats, and firearms

Newfoundland and Labrador harvest 
70s - 600,000 - 900,000 annually
currently - 100,000
no regulation pre-1994
regulation in place 1994

TBMU
Greenland some colonies extirpated, numbers reduced by more than 50%
Northwest declines since 1950s
increasing in North America as of 2007
whole European population trend unknown
Least concern in Europe as well

COMU
sharp decline in Iceland since 2000
though a number of populations increasing (including UK which holds nearly half European population)
Increasing in North America as of 2007

MBTA - Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918
- auks deemed migratory non-game birds - no Canadians could legally hunt them
- 1949, Newfoundland joins Canada and MBTA amended to allow Newfoundlanders to harvest murres between Septemver 1st and March 31st with no permit nor bag limit

- 90s - "The Minister may, where has reasonable cause to believe that it is necessary for conservation purposes, vary any hunting period or quota set out in these Regulations"

- Environment Canada conducted survey 1996-97 hunting season in Newfoundland
- asked how many permit-owners were hunting murres
- found that most people wanted a bag limit of 20 or fewer birds per person, complaints about market gunners


Murre populations are negatively impacted by anthropogenic activity, particularly at the wintering range.

 including gillnet bycatch, marine pollution, oil development, and harvest. Murres are affected by climate change both directly by way of changes in sea ice cover during winter and indirectly by way of 

murre populations fluctuate with shifts in ocean regime and sea surface temperature



Lit cited

Brower, L.P. 1995. Understanding and misunderstanding the migration of the monarch butterfl y (Nymphalidae)
in North America: 1857–1995. J. Lepid. Soc. 49: 304-385

Brower, L.P. 1995. Understanding and misunderstanding the migration of the monarch butterfl y (Nymphalidae)
in North America: 1857–1995. J. Lepid. Soc. 49: 304-385.

Webster et al., 2002

Webster and Marra 2005
